---
title: Study Finds Kemp's Ridley Most At-Risk Among Gulf species
date: 2015-11-23

photo: kemps-ridley-sea-turtle.jpg
---

While it is said, "change is the law of life," there is considerable concern that accelerated sea-level rise, changing climate and increased urbanization are going to have major negative impacts on coastal landscapes and species along the Gulf of Mexico. A recently released Service-affiliated report that evaluates the vulnerability of four key ecosystems and 11 associated species concludes tidal emergent marsh and Kemp ridley sea turtles are the most vulnerable to these emerging threats.

The Gulf Coast Vulnerability Assessment (GCVA) is a Gulf-wide initiative to identify and assess habitat and species vulnerabilities in a consistent manner across the Gulf of Mexico coast. Based on the expert opinions of managers, scientists, administrators and others, the report takes into account an ecosystem's or species' sensitivity to projected changes, the magnitude and rate of exposure, ecological responses, and the ability of habitats and species to adapt to change.

Tidal emergent marshes are submerged at least partially by tidally-influenced water; the ground is high enough (not flooded too deeply for too long) to support emergent herbaceous plants, but too low and wet to support trees or shrubs. These marshes are important foraging grounds for raptors and waterfowl, and provide essential nursery habitat for aquatic life. According to the GCVA, tidal emergent marsh is more vulnerable than mangrove, oyster reef and barrier island ecosystem to projected climate and land use changes. Several factors contribute to marsh vulnerability including land subsidence and erosion, low soil accretion rates, sea level rise, and the inability to migrate inland due to man-made barriers.

The Kemp's ridley sea turtle is classified as the most vulnerable species among those assessed primarily due to loss of nesting habitat to sea level rise, erosion, and urbanization. Kemp's ridleys also have an overall low adaptive capacity score due to their low genetic diversity, and higher nest site fidelity as compared to the other species. The other species assessed are roseate spoonbill, blue crab, clapper rail, mottled duck, spotted seatrout, Eastern oyster, American oystercatcher, red drum, black skimmer, and Wilson's plover.

The GCVA is a collaborative effort spearheaded by the four Landscape Conservation Cooperatives (LCCs) – the Gulf Coast Prairie, the Gulf Coastal Plains & Ozarks, the South Atlantic and the Peninsular Florida that cover the Gulf of Mexico. The LCCs are partnerships among federal agencies, states, tribes, non-governmental organizations, universities, and other entities that collaboratively address broad-scale conservation issues in a defined geographic area. They received support and guidance for the GCVA from many partners, including the Service, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the Northern Gulf Institute, the Gulf of Mexico Alliance, the Louisiana Coastal Protection and Restoration Authority, and the United States Geological Survey (USGS). The GCVA will help guide future conservation and restoration efforts by assisting conservation partners across the Gulf – including the Service – identify vulnerable areas where they can most effectively focus resources. In addition, the document identifies areas where additional research is needed to better anticipate impacts to coastal ecosystems and species along the northern Gulf of Mexico.

"We know that change is inevitable," says John Tirpak, Science Coordinator for the Service's Gulf Restoration Program, "yet understanding the relative magnitude of that change across the landscape and among our trust resources allows us to not have to blindly accept our fate, but rather shape our future. The GCVA provides us a glimpse into our potential future that we can use to help us strategize our next best steps."
